Add NumPy optimization guide (#36)
intel/optimization-zone: software/numpy/README.md

# Intel® Optimized NumPy with oneMKL

> This guide describes how to get optimal NumPy performance on Intel® Xeon® processors by using Intel® oneAPI Math Kernel Library (oneMKL) as the backend for linear algebra, FFT, random number generation, and vectorized math. It covers installation, how to activate each optimization with minimal code changes, thread and NUMA tuning, and how to verify that oneMKL is active, along with measured benchmark results.

Reviewer: Also applies to laptops.

Author: Right. Reworded to not just xeon.

## Table of contents

- [Where NumPy performance comes from](#where-numpy-performance-comes-from)
- [Accelerating NumPy with oneMKL](#accelerating-numpy-with-onemkl)
  - [Installation](#installation)
- [Optimization levers](#optimization-levers)
  - [Linear algebra: BLAS and LAPACK](#linear-algebra-blas-and-lapack)
  - [FFT: mkl_fft](#fft-mkl_fft)
  - [Random number generation: mkl_random](#random-number-generation-mkl_random)
  - [Vectorized math: mkl_umath](#vectorized-math-mkl_umath)
  - [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa)
- [Verifying oneMKL is active](#verifying-onemkl-is-active)
- [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results)
- [Key considerations](#key-considerations)

---

## Where NumPy performance comes from

> NumPy is a thin Python layer over compiled native libraries. The array object and the Python API are NumPy's own, but the arithmetic that dominates runtime is handed off: linear algebra goes to a BLAS/LAPACK library, FFTs to an FFT library, random sampling to a generator, and element-wise math (`sin`, `exp`, `log`) to vectorized loops. How fast NumPy runs is mostly decided by *which* native library each of those calls lands in, not by anything in the Python layer.

Reviewer: I wouldn't say this is correct:
> NumPy is a thin Python layer over compiled native libraries.

NumPy contains lots of its own umath operations, algorithms for converting random bytes to distributions, operations on python objects, characters, etc. Plus the cases where it relies on e.g. highway are not simple layers.

Author: Agreed, wording was an oversimplification.

> That backend is a choice made at install time. conda-forge NumPy ships with OpenBLAS, a solid general-purpose implementation. On Intel® Xeon® it leaves performance on the table, because it does not use the newest AVX-512 code paths that the hardware can run.

Reviewer: I think on windows it uses MKL by default. Also OpenBLAS _does_ use AVX512 on Xeons that support it.

Author: Good catch, this was wrong.
for example, confirmed OpenBLAS picks its SkylakeX (AVX-512) kernels on Ice Lake.

## Accelerating NumPy with oneMKL

Intel® oneAPI Math Kernel Library (oneMKL) supplies AVX-512 implementations for every one of those backends on 3rd Gen Intel® Xeon® (Ice Lake) and newer: BLAS, LAPACK, FFT, random number generation, and vectorized math. Pointing NumPy at oneMKL is how you turn that hardware capability into wall-clock speedup, with no change to your NumPy code. Across a representative set of NumPy-heavy workloads this is a 3.95x geomean speedup at one socket; the full breakdown is in [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results).

The speedup arrives in two parts that activate differently, and the distinction matters for the rest of this guide:

- **Linear algebra (BLAS and LAPACK)** turns on automatically once oneMKL is the backend. `np.dot`, `np.matmul`, and `np.linalg.*` route to it with no code change.

> - **FFT, random, and vectorized math** come from three separate packages (`mkl_fft`, `mkl_random`, `mkl_umath`). These do not activate on import; you switch them on explicitly in code. NumPy itself stays the standard conda-forge build. As of the 2026.0 release, the Intel® Distribution for Python no longer builds its own NumPy: it installs conda-forge NumPy and layers oneMKL underneath, which is exactly why these three are opt-in rather than baked in.

Reviewer: The part about IDP sounds out of place here. Perhaps you could move it to a different paragraph explaining its history.

Author: Moved

### Installation

There are two practical ways to get a oneMKL-backed NumPy. conda is recommended because it also lets you control the OpenMP runtime (see [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa)).

**conda.** A single command installs NumPy, SciPy, the three extension packages (mkl_fft, mkl_random, mkl_umath), and the runtime libraries. The BLAS/LAPACK backend is wired to oneMKL automatically; the extensions are installed but still need explicit activation.

```bash

> conda create -n idp_env -y python=3.13 intelpython3_full \

Reviewer: You could leave just unversioned `python`.

>   -c https://software.repos.intel.com/python/conda \

Reviewer: Could explain what's different between the packages in the Intel channel and in conda-forge.

Author: Added a line

Reviewer: @vchamarthi I cannot find any line explaining what are the differences between the intel packages and the conda-forge ones. Where is that described?

  -c conda-forge --override-channels && \
  conda activate idp_env
```

> The `python=3.13` may be changed to match your project (3.9–3.14 is supported). NumPy is pulled from conda-forge; the Intel channel supplies oneMKL and the extensions. To add oneMKL to an *existing* conda-forge environment instead of creating a new one, install the MKL-variant BLAS and the extensions in place:

Reviewer: MKL is also present in conda-forge.

Author: True. Clarified that conda-forge has the mkl runtime too.

```bash
conda install -y \
  -c https://software.repos.intel.com/python/conda \
  -c conda-forge --override-channels \

>   "blas=*=*_intelmkl" \

Reviewer: Would something break if using `blas=*=*mkl*` with the conda-forge builds? If so, this would be a good place to explain those sorts of details.

Author: Clarified, 
both selectors give an MKL BLAS (*_intelmkl from the Intel channel, *mkl from conda-forge) and noted the Intel channel is needed for the extensions, not the BLAS.

  mkl mkl_fft mkl_random mkl_umath mkl-service
```

`--override-channels` resolves only from the two named channels, so conda does not mix in an OpenBLAS build from elsewhere.

> **pip.** Intel publishes NumPy and SciPy wheels already linked against oneMKL, plus the three extensions, on its pip index. There is no symlink to swap; the wheels arrive pre-linked.

Reviewer 2: Technically, the pip index is the API that points to the public _repo_ we're hosting the numpy and scipy wheels on.

Author: Updated.

```bash
pip install --index-url https://software.repos.intel.com/python/pypi \
  numpy scipy mkl_fft mkl_random mkl_umath mkl-service
```

> Use `--index-url`, not `--extra-index-url`: Intel's index is a partial mirror, and with `--extra-index-url` pip would see PyPI's higher-numbered OpenBLAS wheel and install that instead. Packages Intel does not mirror (for example `threadpoolctl`, used for [verification](#verifying-onemkl-is-active)) install normally from PyPI in a separate step. The Intel wheels cover Linux and Windows (CPython 3.9–3.14); there is no macOS build.

Reviewer: These version numbers are bound to get outdated soon. I don't think this guide will be receiving updates as soon as new python versions get released.

I also do not think mentioning macOS here would be relevant.

Whichever path you take, set the threading layer before anything imports NumPy. This selects Intel's OpenMP runtime (`libiomp5`) for oneMKL; setting it early matters because mixing OpenMP runtimes in one process hurts performance, as explained under [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa):

```bash

> export MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL

Reviewer 2: perhaps underneath this should have a bash comment like `# run numpy workloads with Intel OpenMP threading now`

Author: Added a comment to this setting.

> export MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL

Reviewer: It should mention that this needs to be set before importing anything with MKL, or otherwise will have no effect.

Author: Good point, Updated it

```

---

## Optimization levers

Each subsection below is one lever: what it accelerates, when it is worth using, and how to switch it on. The first is automatic; the rest are explicit.

> The three explicit extensions share an activation model, and the key point is how little code it takes. Activation is a single one-time call: a **context manager** around a block, best when you want oneMKL for one section and stock NumPy elsewhere, or a **patch/restore pair**, best when oneMKL should stay active for the life of the process. That one call is the only addition. It rewires NumPy's internals so your existing `np.fft.*`, `np.random.*`, and `np.sin`/`np.exp`/`np.log` call sites dispatch to oneMKL with their source unchanged.

Reviewer: What about log1p, expm1, and similar.

Author: The list is much broader, I just mentioned couple of them, 
but I broadly expanded the list here.

Concretely, given an existing function, the only edit is the import-and-activate block at the top. The function body is untouched:

```python
import numpy as np

def analyze(signal):
    spectrum = np.fft.fft(signal)    # -> numpy.fft, then mkl_fft after activation
    power = np.abs(spectrum) ** 2    # -> VML after activation (large arrays)
    return np.log(power + 1.0)       # -> VML after activation (large arrays)

# The only addition: import each extension and activate it once, before calling analyze().
import mkl_fft, mkl_umath
mkl_fft.patch_numpy_fft()
mkl_umath.patch_numpy_umath()

result = analyze(np.random.randn(1_000_000))  # same call, now backed by oneMKL
```

After the two `patch_*` calls, `np.fft.fft` and the ufuncs inside `analyze` dispatch to oneMKL; the function itself never changed. (`mkl_random` has the same `patch_numpy_random()` call, with the reproducibility caveat noted in its section below.) The per-lever benchmarks that follow wrap a block to make the before/after timing explicit in one script, but in real code the import plus one activation call is the whole change.

### Linear algebra: BLAS and LAPACK

> This is the lever you get for free. Once oneMKL is the backend, `np.dot`, `np.matmul`, `np.linalg.*`, and everything built on them (covariances, distances, decompositions) run on oneMKL's AVX-512 BLAS and LAPACK with no code change and nothing to activate. It is the largest single contributor to the geomean in [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results).

Reviewer: This is bound to get outdated soon as new instructions like avx10.2 become commonplace.

Author: updated the phrasing a bit instead of just avx512

The example below times the same `np.fft.fft2(a)` call twice. The call is identical in both runs; the only difference is that the second runs inside the context manager, which reroutes it to oneMKL:

```python
import timeit
import numpy as np
import mkl_fft

a = np.random.randn(4096, 4096)

stock_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: np.fft.fft2(a), number=10) / 10 * 1000

with mkl_fft.mkl_fft():
    mkl_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: np.fft.fft2(a), number=10) / 10 * 1000

print(f"stock numpy.fft : {stock_ms:.1f} ms")
print(f"mkl_fft         : {mkl_ms:.1f} ms")
print(f"speedup         : {stock_ms / mkl_ms:.1f}x")
```

Measured on AWS, Intel® Xeon® 6975P-C, 16 cores / 32 threads (HT on), 1 socket, Ubuntu 26.04 LTS. Numbers vary by hardware.

```
stock numpy.fft : 722.7 ms
mkl_fft         : 43.0 ms
speedup         : 16.8x
```

> To keep oneMKL active for the whole process rather than a single block, use the patch/restore pair:

Reviewer: It should clarify that this is about the FFT part.

Author: Updated

It can be used two ways. The **context manager** is the zero-code-change path, like the other extensions: existing `np.random.*` call sites keep working and route through VSL (shown [below](#random-number-generation-mkl_random)). The **explicit `RandomState` API** is a small code change, but it lets you pick the generator and the sampling method, which is how you reach the fastest path. The benchmark below uses the explicit API for exactly that reason: `method='BoxMuller'` is the fast normal sampler.

The example below compares wall time for 100 million normal samples:

```python
import timeit
import numpy as np
import mkl_random

N = 100_000_000

np.random.seed(0)
stock_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: np.random.standard_normal(N), number=3) / 3 * 1000

rng = mkl_random.RandomState(seed=0, brng='MT19937')
mkl_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: rng.standard_normal(N, method='BoxMuller'), number=3) / 3 * 1000

> print(f"stock numpy.random : {stock_ms:.1f} ms")

Reviewer: I'd say this is not the fairest comparison, since NumPy recommends `np.random.Generator` for better performance.

Author: Re-ran it against `np.random.default_rng` on the same 6975P-C. Generator is faster than the legacy global which is expected.
updated the code, baseline, and numbers.

### Threads and NUMA

The levers above decide *which* code runs; this one decides how many cores it runs on, which on server-grade Xeon is often the difference between a good speedup and a great one. oneMKL parallelizes by default, so the goal is to match its thread count to the hardware and avoid over-subscription.

**Environment variables.**

| Variable | Recommended value | Effect |
|---|---|---|
| `MKL_THREADING_LAYER` | `INTEL` | Use Intel OpenMP (`libiomp5`) |
| `MKL_NUM_THREADS` | physical core count | Cap MKL thread count |
| `MKL_DYNAMIC` | `FALSE` | Disable automatic thread scaling |
| `KMP_AFFINITY` | `granularity=fine,compact,1,0` | Pin threads to physical cores |

`KMP_AFFINITY=granularity=fine,compact,1,0` is appropriate for single-socket systems or when running one process per socket. On multi-socket systems without `numactl` it may bind threads across sockets; verify the actual binding with `KMP_AFFINITY=verbose`.

For workloads that spawn multiple Python processes, reduce oneMKL to one thread per process to avoid over-subscription:

```bash
export MKL_NUM_THREADS=1
export MKL_THREADING_LAYER=SEQUENTIAL
```

> This applies to `multiprocessing.Pool`, `concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor`, and tools like Dask or Ray. Each worker initializes its own oneMKL instance; without capping, N workers × default thread count threads all compete for the same cores.

Reviewer: It's also possible to parallelize through Python threads, especially on free-threaded builds, where setting those environment variables after import would have no effect.

Also, it's perhaps quite common to use `joblib` to parallelize things in Python, which sets MKL threads automatically as `nthreads_max / nthreads_joblib_call`. It could recommend joblib here.

Author: Added a joblib note

```python
import mkl

print(mkl.get_version_string())               # confirm MKL version at runtime
print(mkl.get_max_threads())                  # current thread count

mkl.set_num_threads(8)                        # cap all MKL operations
mkl.domain_set_num_threads(1, domain="fft")  # cap FFT specifically
mkl.free_buffers()                            # return MKL scratch memory to OS
```

Valid domain values: `"blas"`, `"fft"`, `"vml"`, `"all"`. (`"pardiso"` is oneMKL's sparse direct solver, not used by NumPy directly.)

**NUMA pinning on multi-socket systems.** Keeping all oneMKL threads within one socket avoids inter-socket memory traffic. The benchmarks in [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results) show 3.95x geomean at one socket versus 3.66x across both on a 2-socket machine; that gap is NUMA overhead, not a compute limit.

Single process, one socket:

```bash
export MKL_NUM_THREADS=<cores_per_socket>
export MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL
numactl --cpunodebind=0 --membind=0 python your_script.py
```

Two data-parallel processes, one per socket:

```bash
numactl --cpunodebind=0 --membind=0 python worker.py &
numactl --cpunodebind=1 --membind=1 python worker.py &
```

> **OpenMP runtime.** oneMKL's threaded paths run on an OpenMP runtime, and which one gets loaded depends on how NumPy was installed. The Intel pip wheels bundle Intel OpenMP (`libiomp5`), and `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL` keeps oneMKL on it. conda environments resolve the runtime through the `_openmp_mutex` metapackage, whose default may be GNU's `libgomp`, which is less performant on Intel hardware. To pin LLVM's LibOMP (the upstreamed continuation of Intel OpenMP):

Reviewer: That `_openmp_mutex` mechanism wouldn't work on windows.

Author: corrected the guide on this part

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge _openmp_mutex=*=*_llvm
```

> The failure to avoid is loading two OpenMP runtimes in one process (for example `libgomp` pulled in by another library alongside oneMKL's `libiomp5`), which causes thread over-subscription and erratic performance. Keeping `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL` and a single runtime in the environment avoids it. Switching the OpenMP backend in conda environments is not supported on Windows.

Reviewer: I don't get how would this avoid it. `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL` would only affect MKL, not other packages pulling `libgomp`.

Author: MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL only governs MKL, so another package's libgomp still gives two runtimes. Rewrote the section and removed the false claim that INTEL avoids it

> # Intel® Optimized NumPy with oneMKL

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
# Intel® Optimized NumPy With oneMKL
```

> This guide describes how to get optimal NumPy performance on Intel® processors, from Xeon® servers to AVX-capable laptops, by using Intel® oneAPI Math Kernel Library (oneMKL) as the backend for linear algebra, FFT, random number generation, and vectorized math. It covers installation, how to activate each optimization with minimal code changes, thread and NUMA tuning, and how to verify that oneMKL is active, along with measured benchmark results.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This guide describes how to get optimal NumPy performance on Intel® processors, from servers to laptops, by using Intel® oneAPI Math Kernel Library (oneMKL) as the backend for linear algebra, Fast Fourier Transform (FFT), random number generation, and vectorized math. It covers installation, how to activate each optimization with minimal code changes, thread and NUMA tuning, and how to verify that oneMKL is active, along with measured benchmark results.
```

Author: Good, That's generic enough

> ## Table of contents

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Table Of Contents
```

- [Where NumPy performance comes from](#where-numpy-performance-comes-from)
- [Accelerating NumPy with oneMKL](#accelerating-numpy-with-onemkl)
  - [Installation](#installation)
- [Optimization levers](#optimization-levers)
  - [Linear algebra: BLAS and LAPACK](#linear-algebra-blas-and-lapack)
  - [FFT: mkl_fft](#fft-mkl_fft)
  - [Random number generation: mkl_random](#random-number-generation-mkl_random)
  - [Vectorized math: mkl_umath](#vectorized-math-mkl_umath)
  - [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa)
- [Verifying oneMKL is active](#verifying-onemkl-is-active)
- [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results)
- [Key considerations](#key-considerations)

---

> ## Where NumPy performance comes from

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## NumPy Performance Contributors
```

Please also update the table of contents

Author: Updated

NumPy runs much of its work in its own compiled code, but its heaviest numerical kernels are handed off to external libraries: linear algebra to a BLAS/LAPACK library, FFTs to an FFT library, and large element-wise transcendental math (`sin`, `exp`, `log`) to vectorized loops. For those kernels, performance is largely decided by *which* native library the call lands in.

> That backend is a choice made at install time. PyPI and conda-forge NumPy ship with OpenBLAS, a strong general-purpose implementation that uses AVX-512 on recent Intel CPUs. oneMKL goes further in two ways: its kernels are tuned for Intel hardware, and it accelerates FFT, random number generation, and vectorized math, which a BLAS library does not cover. Both gains apply on Intel® Xeon® servers and on AVX-512-capable Intel client and laptop CPUs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
That backend is a choice made at install time. PyPI and conda-forge NumPy ship with OpenBLAS, a strong general-purpose implementation that uses AVX-512 on recent Intel CPUs. oneMKL goes further in two ways: its kernels are tuned for Intel hardware, and it accelerates a number of functionalities not covered by a BLAS library such as FFT, random number generation, and vectorized math. Both gains apply on Intel® Xeon® servers and on AVX-512-capable Intel client and laptop CPUs.
```

> ## Accelerating NumPy with oneMKL

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Accelerating NumPy With oneMKL
```

> Intel® oneAPI Math Kernel Library (oneMKL) supplies AVX-512 implementations for every one of those backends on 3rd Gen Intel® Xeon® (Ice Lake) and newer: BLAS, LAPACK, FFT, random number generation, and vectorized math. Pointing NumPy at oneMKL is how you turn that hardware capability into wall-clock speedup, with no change to your NumPy code. Across a representative set of NumPy-heavy workloads this is a 3.95x geomean speedup at one socket; the full breakdown is in [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results).

Reviewer 3: This paragraph seems to hit most of the same points of the previous paragraph. Please consider rewording/trimming it down.

Reviewer 3: In other parts of this article, you highlight laptop support in addition to servers. Is there a reason why you only specify Xeon support in this paragraph?

Author: Good catches, both fixed. I trimmed the paragraph so it no longer repeats the backend list and AVX-512 point from the paragraph above.

I removed the "3rd Gen Xeon (Ice Lake) and newer" qualifier here so it matches the rest of the guide, which covers Intel servers and laptops alike.

The speedup arrives in two parts that activate differently, and the distinction matters for the rest of this guide:

> - **Linear algebra (BLAS and LAPACK)** turns on automatically once oneMKL is the backend. `np.dot`, `np.matmul`, and `np.linalg.*` route to it with no code change.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Linear algebra (BLAS and LAPACK)** turns on automatically once oneMKL is the backend (details for this in the [installation](#installation) section). `np.dot`, `np.matmul`, and `np.linalg.*` route to it with no code change.
```

> - **FFT, random, and vectorized math** come from three separate packages (`mkl_fft`, `mkl_random`, `mkl_umath`). These do not activate on import; you switch them on explicitly in code.

Reviewer: It could link to the github repositories of those packages.

Author: Good addition!

> **Packaging note.** Explicit activation applies to the current packaging ([Intel® Distribution for Python](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/distribution-for-python.html) 2026.0 and later), which installs standard NumPy and layers oneMKL underneath. Releases up to 2025.3.0 shipped an Intel-built NumPy that activated `mkl_fft` and `mkl_umath` on import, and their older extensions lack the `patch_*` functions used below. On an older release, see [Key considerations](#key-considerations) before adding activation calls.

### Installation

> There are two practical ways to get a oneMKL-backed NumPy. conda is recommended because it also lets you control the OpenMP runtime (see [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa)).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
There are two practical ways to get a oneMKL-backed NumPy. conda is recommended because it also lets you control the OpenMP runtime (see [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa)). [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge) distribution is recommended.
```

> **conda.** A single command installs NumPy, SciPy, the three extension packages (mkl_fft, mkl_random, mkl_umath), and the runtime libraries. The BLAS/LAPACK backend routes to oneMKL automatically; the extensions are installed but still need explicit activation.

Reviewer 3: Please provide a link to an example of this explicit activation. Is that in the "Optimization Levers" section?

Author: Yes, the patch activations are described in that section.

```bash
conda create -n idp_env -y python intelpython3_full \
  -c https://software.repos.intel.com/python/conda \
  -c conda-forge --override-channels && \
  conda activate idp_env
```

> Pin `python=<version>` to match your project if you need a specific interpreter. NumPy comes from conda-forge; the Intel channel supplies the `mkl_fft`/`mkl_random`/`mkl_umath` extensions and Intel's latest oneMKL builds. To add oneMKL to an *existing* environment that already has conda-forge NumPy installed, swap its BLAS to the MKL variant and add the extensions in place (this re-links the NumPy you already have, it does not reinstall NumPy):

Reviewer: I think this part is redundant:
> Pin `python=<version>` to match your project if you need a specific interpreter

Since this is not a general conda guide.

```bash

> conda install -y \

Reviewer: **Very** important to mention here that packages from the Intel channel are meant to be compatible with packages from conda-forge but not with packages from Anaconda, which is the default channel.

Author: Good point, Added

  -c https://software.repos.intel.com/python/conda \
  -c conda-forge --override-channels \

>   "blas=*=*_intelmkl" \

Reviewer: What about lapack? If this is done on an existing environment, there's no guarantee that the user won't have different backends for blas and lapack.

Author: On the Intel channel `blas` is a metapackage that pulls the whole runtime stack: libblas, libcblas, liblapack, and liblapacke (all the *_intelmkl build), plus mkl.
Installing blas=*=*_intelmkl into an existing OpenBLAS environment moves BLAS and LAPACK (and cblas/lapacke) to MKL together in one go, so they can't end up on different backends through this command.

>   "blas=*=*_intelmkl" \

Reviewer: 'blas' is a development package providing headers, .pc files, and similar, depending in turn on 'libblas'. 'libblas' is the runtime that sets the backend.

Author: I will fix the wording, `blas` as the metapackage and `libblas`/`liblapack` as the runtime selectors.

  mkl mkl_fft mkl_random mkl_umath mkl-service
```

> `--override-channels` resolves only from the two named channels, so conda does not mix in an OpenBLAS build from elsewhere. The `blas=*=*_intelmkl` selector requests the Intel channel's MKL-backed BLAS; conda-forge offers an equivalent under the build string `blas=*=*mkl`. Either gives an MKL BLAS backend. The Intel channel is required for the three extensions and Intel's latest oneMKL builds.

Reviewer: I assume this advice might have been copied from other documentation pages.

The reason why it was there was to avoid pulling packages from the Anaconda channel which have higher priority. That's worth mentioning here.

Author: updated this explanation

> `--override-channels` resolves only from the two named channels, so conda does not mix in an OpenBLAS build from elsewhere. The `blas=*=*_intelmkl` selector requests the Intel channel's MKL-backed BLAS; conda-forge offers an equivalent under the build string `blas=*=*mkl`. Either gives an MKL BLAS backend. The Intel channel is required for the three extensions and Intel's latest oneMKL builds.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`--override-channels` resolves only from the two named channels, so conda does not mix in an OpenBLAS build from elsewhere. The `blas=*=*_intelmkl` selector requests the Intel channel's MKL-backed BLAS; conda-forge offers an equivalent under the build string `blas=*=*mkl*`. Either gives an MKL BLAS backend. The Intel channel is required for the three extensions and Intel's latest oneMKL builds.
```

**pip.** Intel publishes NumPy and SciPy wheels already linked against oneMKL, plus the three extensions, on a public wheel repository. The `--index-url` below points pip at that repository's PyPI-compatible index API. There is no symlink to swap; the wheels arrive pre-linked.

```bash
pip install --index-url https://software.repos.intel.com/python/pypi \
  numpy scipy mkl_fft mkl_random mkl_umath mkl-service
```

Use `--index-url`, not `--extra-index-url`: Intel's index is a partial mirror, and with `--extra-index-url` pip would see PyPI's higher-numbered OpenBLAS wheel and install that instead. Packages Intel does not mirror (for example `threadpoolctl`, used for [verification](#verifying-onemkl-is-active)) install normally from PyPI in a separate step. The Intel wheels target Linux and Windows; if `pip` reports no matching distribution, check that your platform and Python version are covered on the index.

> Whichever path you take, choose the OpenMP threading layer and set it **before anything imports NumPy or MKL**. The variable is read once at MKL load time, so exporting it after the import has no effect. Which value to pick is explained under [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa); the safe default for a typical pip or mixed environment is:

Reviewer: Also applicable to SciPy.

```bash

> export MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU   # share one OpenMP runtime (libgomp) with other packages

Reviewer 4: Considering this is a performance guide, it is important to note that Intel OpenMP often provides better performance with oneMKL on Intel Hardware. Should this guidance be changed to use `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL`? What are some other considerations for using GNU threading here?

Reviewer 4: If the reason for using GNU is to support a common OpenMP vendor for multiple packages in user installation, then can we explicitly mention that here so that anyone who does not need vendor compatibility across packages can choose to use Intel OpenMP for the best performance?

Author: You're right that Intel OpenMP usually gives the best oneMKL performance on Intel hardware. most non-Intel PyPI packages bundle libgomp, and running INTEL alongside a loaded libgomp puts two OpenMP runtimes in one process is not desired. 

The "Threads and NUMA" section has the conditional rule: INTEL when Intel OpenMP is the only runtime present (all-Intel/conda env) for best performance, GNU in mixed pip environments. I'll surface that tradeoff

```

---

> ## Optimization levers

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Optimization Levers
```

Each subsection below is one lever: what it accelerates, when it is worth using, and how to switch it on. The first is automatic; the rest are explicit.

The three explicit extensions share an activation model, and the key point is how little code it takes. Activation is a single one-time call: a **context manager** around a block, best when you want oneMKL for one section and stock NumPy elsewhere, or a **patch/restore pair**, best when oneMKL should stay active for the life of the process. That one call is the only addition. It redirects NumPy's internals so your existing `np.fft.*`, `np.random.*`, and `np.sin`/`np.exp`/`np.log` call sites dispatch to oneMKL with their source unchanged.

> Concretely, given an existing function, the only edit is the import-and-activate block at the top. The function body is untouched:

Reviewer 3: This makes it sound like the imports and activation are supposed to be at the top. Does import mkl_fft [...] have to come after the function definition or can it before? If it can be before, I think it will be less confusing to the reader to move it to the top of the example source code.

Author: Fair, the imports and patch_* calls just need to run before the function is called. they can be before. Moved to top.

```python
import numpy as np

def analyze(signal):
    spectrum = np.fft.fft(signal)    # -> numpy.fft, then mkl_fft after activation

>     power = np.abs(spectrum) ** 2    # -> VML after activation (large arrays)

Reviewer 3: Please provide the full form of the abbreviation VML

Author: expanded

    return np.log(power + 1.0)       # -> VML after activation (large arrays)

# The only addition: import each extension and activate it once, before calling analyze().
import mkl_fft, mkl_umath
mkl_fft.patch_numpy_fft()
mkl_umath.patch_numpy_umath()

result = analyze(np.random.randn(1_000_000))  # same call, now backed by oneMKL
```

After the two `patch_*` calls, `np.fft.fft` and the ufuncs inside `analyze` dispatch to oneMKL; the function itself never changed. (`mkl_random` has the same `patch_numpy_random()` call, with the reproducibility caveat noted in its section below.) The per-lever benchmarks that follow wrap a block to make the before/after timing explicit in one script, but in real code the import plus one activation call is the whole change.

> ### Linear algebra: BLAS and LAPACK

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Linear Algebra: BLAS and LAPACK
```

> This is the lever you get for free. Once oneMKL is the backend, `np.dot`, `np.matmul`, `np.linalg.*`, and everything built on them (covariances, distances, decompositions) run on oneMKL's BLAS and LAPACK with no code change and nothing to activate. These kernels dispatch at runtime to an optimized code path for the CPU's instruction set (e.g.,  AVX-512 on current Xeons). This is the largest single contributor to the geomean in [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This is the lever you get for free. Once oneMKL is the backend, `np.dot`, `np.matmul`, `np.linalg.*`, and everything built on them (covariances, distances, decompositions) run on oneMKL's BLAS and LAPACK with no code change and nothing to activate. These kernels dispatch at runtime to an optimized code path for the CPU's instruction set (e.g.,  AVX-512 on current Xeons). This is the largest single contributor to the geomean speedup in [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results).
```

oneMKL parallelizes these calls across cores by default, so the main thing to manage is *how many* threads it uses, covered under [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa).

### FFT: mkl_fft

`mkl_fft` is a Python interface to oneMKL's Fourier transform functions. It handles arbitrarily strided arrays (non-contiguous, negatively strided, multi-dimensional) directly, without first copying into a contiguous buffer, and covers real and complex data, single and double precision, and in-place and out-of-place transforms. It is worth switching on for any FFT-heavy workload.

The example below times the same `np.fft.fft2(a)` call twice. The call is identical in both runs; the only difference is that the second runs inside the context manager, which reroutes it to oneMKL:

```python
import timeit
import numpy as np
import mkl_fft

a = np.random.randn(4096, 4096)

stock_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: np.fft.fft2(a), number=10) / 10 * 1000

with mkl_fft.mkl_fft():
    mkl_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: np.fft.fft2(a), number=10) / 10 * 1000

print(f"stock numpy.fft : {stock_ms:.1f} ms")
print(f"mkl_fft         : {mkl_ms:.1f} ms")
print(f"speedup         : {stock_ms / mkl_ms:.1f}x")
```

> Measured on AWS, Intel® Xeon® 6975P-C, 16 cores / 32 threads (HT on), 1 socket, Ubuntu 26.04 LTS. Numbers vary by hardware.

Reviewer 3: Have these numbers been through PDT?

Author: These are example snippets and freshly measured (FFT on the AWS Xeon 6975P-C) but have not been through PDT.
where as the benchmarking results section displayed numbers and speedups are been through the PCR review process and approved and published on Intel Distribution for Python page - https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/distribution-for-python.html

Author: @adgubrud Any further opinion on this part?

Reviewer 3: @jasukhar do you have any thoughts here? My understanding is that all performance claims need to have PDT approval.

```
stock numpy.fft : 722.7 ms
mkl_fft         : 43.0 ms
speedup         : 16.8x
```

To keep `mkl_fft` routing NumPy's FFT calls for the whole process rather than a single block, use the patch/restore pair (this affects the FFT functions only, not other NumPy operations):

```python
mkl_fft.patch_numpy_fft()
result = np.fft.rfft2(a)
mkl_fft.restore_numpy_fft()
```

For SciPy users there is a separate backend:

```python
import scipy.fft
import mkl_fft.interfaces.scipy_fft as mkl_scipy_fft

with scipy.fft.set_backend(mkl_scipy_fft):
    result = scipy.fft.fft2(a)
```

Covered transforms: `fft`, `ifft`, `fft2`, `ifft2`, `fftn`, `ifftn`, `rfft`, `irfft`, `rfft2`, `irfft2`, `rfftn`, `irfftn`, `hfft`, `ihfft`, `fftshift`, `ifftshift`, `fftfreq`, `rfftfreq`.

> ### Random number generation: mkl_random

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Random Number Generation: mkl_random
```

> `mkl_random` is a Python interface to oneMKL's Vector Statistics Library (VSL). It samples from the same distributions as `numpy.random` but is not a fixed-seed drop-in: the same seed produces a different sequence. Use it when generating large volumes of random data is a bottleneck and you do not depend on reproducing specific values.

Reviewer: I think it's worth mentioning methodological differences here, like `mkl_random` being 32-bit while numpy by default uses 64-bit generators.

Author: Good point, I added this to this section.

> It can be used two ways. The **context manager** is the zero-code-change path, like the other extensions: existing `np.random.*` call sites keep working and route through VSL (shown [below](#random-number-generation-mkl_random)). The **explicit `RandomState` API** is a small code change that lets you pick the generator and the sampling method for the fastest path. The benchmark below uses it with `method='BoxMuller'`, oneMKL's fast normal sampler.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
It can be used two ways. The **context manager** is the zero-code-change path, like the other extensions: existing `np.random.*` call sites keep working and route through VSL (shown below). The **explicit `RandomState` API** is a small code change that lets you pick the generator and the sampling method for the fastest path. The benchmark below uses it with `method='BoxMuller'`, oneMKL's fast normal sampler.
```

That link just takes the user to top of the "Random number generation" section.

Author: thanks for catching that

The example below compares wall time for 100 million normal samples against `np.random.default_rng`, NumPy's modern `Generator` API:

```python
import timeit
import numpy as np
import mkl_random

N = 100_000_000

rng_np = np.random.default_rng(0)
stock_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: rng_np.standard_normal(N), number=5) / 5 * 1000

rng = mkl_random.RandomState(seed=0, brng='MT19937')
mkl_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: rng.standard_normal(N, method='BoxMuller'), number=5) / 5 * 1000

print(f"numpy Generator : {stock_ms:.1f} ms")
print(f"mkl_random      : {mkl_ms:.1f} ms")
print(f"speedup         : {stock_ms / mkl_ms:.1f}x")
```

Measured on AWS, Intel® Xeon® 6975P-C, 16 cores / 32 threads (HT on), 1 socket, Ubuntu 26.04 LTS. Numbers vary by hardware.

```

> numpy Generator : 982.0 ms

Reviewer 3: Have these numbers been through PDT?

Author: NO, Like I said above.
Should I go through the PDT for presenting the expected output for this example snippets? 
Or do you suggest to remove expected output in this case?

mkl_random      : 254.0 ms
speedup         : 3.9x
```

> **Reproducibility note:** `mkl_random` and `numpy.random` produce different sequences from the same seed. If your tests or simulations depend on specific random values, do not swap them.

> `brng='MT19937'` selects the Mersenne Twister generator, matching `numpy.random`'s default algorithm. `method='BoxMuller'` is the faster of oneMKL's two normal-sampling methods; the alternative `'ICDF'` (inverse CDF) is slower but more accurate in the tails.

Reviewer: This
> slower but more accurate in the tails

Is not very clear for someone not familiar with the methodologies. Could link to some wikipedia article or similar. At 100 million samples, the differences in the ranges that Box-Mueller can output compared to the default ziggurat from numpy can have a **large** impact on practical applications.

Author: Added some explanation and hyper links to couple of methodologies.

If you do not need to choose the sampling method, the context manager is the zero-code-change path: existing `np.random.*` calls route through oneMKL VSL with their source untouched, exactly like `mkl_fft` and `mkl_umath`.

```python
with mkl_random.mkl_random():
    arr = np.random.standard_normal(1_000_000)  # backed by oneMKL VSL
```

> For parallel Monte Carlo workloads, the `MT2203` family produces statistically independent streams per member ID. Each worker gets its own stream with no coordination or locking:

Reviewer: It doesn't explain what those member IDs refer to. Also could suggest state jumping if that's offered by mkl-random, since most of numpy's generators offer that functionality.

Author: explained member ID `MT2203`, and added code snippet for the state-jumping using `skipahead(n)` supported by mkl_random which is a one good way to partition one stream across workers.

```python
import mkl_random

n_workers = 4
streams = [
    mkl_random.RandomState(seed=42, brng=("MT2203", i))
    for i in range(n_workers)
]

> samples_per_worker = [s.standard_normal(1_000_000) for s in streams]

Reviewer: Since this doesn't execute in parallel: how different would it be from setting different seeds? I assume that the seeder will have some non-trivial initialization that would make two adjacent seeds produce uncorrelated outputs.

Author: Good question. Per [Intel's oneMKL docs](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/onemkl/developer-reference-c/2025-2/basic-generators.html), MT2203 is "a set of 6024 generators designed to create up to 6024 independent random sequences" for parallel Monte Carlo, so distinct IDs are independent by design. Different seeds of a single generator don't carry that guarantee (they're offsets into one sequence). The same page documents skip-ahead as the other supported way to split one generator into independent streams. In practice adjacent seeds are usually fine; MT2203 or skip-ahead is for when you want the guarantee.

```

> ### Vectorized math: mkl_umath

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Vectorized Math: mkl_umath
```

VML takes over only above a per-operation minimum array size: roughly 8,192 elements for transcendentals (`sin`, `cos`, `exp`, `log`), 8,000 for `divide`, and 100,000 for `add`/`subtract`/`multiply` in `mkl_umath` 0.4.x. Below those sizes NumPy's native loops continue to run. These cutoffs are `mkl_umath` implementation details and can change between versions; the takeaway for tuning is that the extension helps most on large arrays.

```python
import timeit
import numpy as np
import mkl_umath

a = np.linspace(0.0, 2 * np.pi, 10_000_000)

stock_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: np.sin(a) + np.exp(a) + np.log(np.abs(a) + 1), number=10) / 10 * 1000

with mkl_umath.mkl_umath():
    mkl_ms = timeit.timeit(lambda: np.sin(a) + np.exp(a) + np.log(np.abs(a) + 1), number=10) / 10 * 1000

print(f"stock numpy ufuncs : {stock_ms:.1f} ms")
print(f"mkl_umath          : {mkl_ms:.1f} ms")
print(f"speedup            : {stock_ms / mkl_ms:.1f}x")
```

Measured on AWS, Intel® Xeon® 6975P-C, 16 cores / 32 threads (HT on), 1 socket, Ubuntu 26.04 LTS. Numbers vary by hardware.

```

> stock numpy ufuncs : 135.3 ms

Reviewer 3: Have these numbers been through PDT?

Author: No, Like I said above,

Should I go through the PDT for presenting the expected output for this example snippets? 
Or do you suggest to remove expected output in this case?

mkl_umath          : 12.9 ms
speedup            : 10.5x
```

To keep the patch active for the whole process, use the patch/restore pair:

```python
mkl_umath.patch_numpy_umath()
out = np.exp(a)
mkl_umath.restore_numpy_umath()
```

> In multithreaded code, apply the patch before any threads start computing, or wrap all threads in the context manager. Patching while other threads are mid-computation is unsafe: the ufunc inner-loop pointers are swapped without locking, which can cause incorrect results or a crash in threads simultaneously executing a ufunc.

Reviewer 3: This seems like a general recommendation, not exclusive to mkl_umath. Should this move to the "Optimization Levers" parent section?

Author: Moved to this section top

### Threads and NUMA

The levers above decide *which* code runs; this one decides how many cores it runs on, which on server-grade Xeon is often the difference between a good speedup and a great one. oneMKL parallelizes by default, so the goal is to match its thread count to the hardware and avoid over-subscription.

> **Environment variables.**

Reviewer: Could mention again that these need to be set before importing anything with either MKL or OpenMP.

Reviewer 3: I agree - I suggest adding a quick statement that environment variables are set in the terminal before calling python

Author: That's a basic clarification I missed in this section, I added it.

| Variable | Recommended value | Effect |
|---|---|---|
| `MKL_THREADING_LAYER` | `GNU` (mixed env) or `INTEL` (all-Intel) | Select MKL's OpenMP runtime; see note below |

> | `MKL_NUM_THREADS` | physical core count | Cap MKL thread count |

Reviewer: Is this guaranteed to work as intended if you set `MKL_NUM_THREADS` to number of physical cores, then bind the threads to numbers from the system, but don't specify something like `OMP_PLACES=threads`? Wouldn't it potentially end up using hyperthreads if the system enumerates them in an interleaved order?

Reviewer 4: This behavior depends on `MKL_DYNAMIC` as described in https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/onemkl/developer-guide-linux/2026-0/mkl-dynamic.html.
```
The default value of MKL_DYNAMIC is TRUE,
regardless of OMP_DYNAMIC, whose default value may be FALSE.

When MKL_DYNAMIC is TRUE, Intel® oneAPI Math Kernel Library (oneMKL)
may use fewer OpenMP threads than the maximum number you specify.

For example, MKL_DYNAMIC set to TRUE enables optimal choice of
the number of threads in the following cases:

- If the requested number of threads exceeds the number of physical cores
  (perhaps because of using the Intel® Hyper-Threading Technology),
  Intel® oneAPI Math Kernel Library (oneMKL) scales down the number of
  OpenMP threads to the number of physical cores.
```
This means if `MKL_DYNAMIC=FALSE`, user-side thread-binding is respected by oneMKL and hyperthreading can take place.

Author: Good catch, 
@vmalia thanks for pitching in,

if you set MKL_DYNAMIC=FALSE (which this guide's table currently recommends), that automatic scale-down is off and oneMKL respects

| `MKL_DYNAMIC` | `FALSE` | Disable automatic thread scaling |

> | `KMP_AFFINITY` | `granularity=fine,compact,1,0` | Pin threads to physical cores (Intel OpenMP only) |

Reviewer 3: what is the breakdown of these arguments "fine,compact,1,0"? Is there a reference we can point to?

Reviewer 4: https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/dpcpp-cpp-compiler/developer-guide-reference/2025-2/thread-affinity-interface.html#KMP_AFFINITY_ENVIRONMENT_VARIABLE

Author: Thanks for raising that, 
I have added the reference links to all the env vars source.

> `KMP_AFFINITY` is an Intel OpenMP setting, so it applies only when oneMKL is on the Intel runtime (`MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL`); under the GNU layer use `GOMP_CPU_AFFINITY` or `numactl` instead. `KMP_AFFINITY=granularity=fine,compact,1,0` is appropriate for single-socket systems or when running one process per socket. On multi-socket systems without `numactl` it may bind threads across sockets; verify the actual binding with `KMP_AFFINITY=verbose`.

Reviewer: What about LLVM's OMP?

Author: Added. The threading section now covers LibOMP

> `KMP_AFFINITY` is an Intel OpenMP setting, so it applies only when oneMKL is on the Intel runtime (`MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL`); under the GNU layer use `GOMP_CPU_AFFINITY` or `numactl` instead. `KMP_AFFINITY=granularity=fine,compact,1,0` is appropriate for single-socket systems or when running one process per socket. On multi-socket systems without `numactl` it may bind threads across sockets; verify the actual binding with `KMP_AFFINITY=verbose`.

Reviewer: What about `OMP_PROC_BIND`?

Reviewer 4: oneMKL has a detailed guide for working with Intel OpenMP under different scenarios: https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/onemkl/developer-guide-linux/2026-0/improving-performance-with-threading.html.

`KMP_AFFINITY` has existed in Intel OpenMP before the OpenMP spec introduced `OMP_PROC_BIND` and `KMP_AFFINITY` takes precedence over the `OMP_PROC_BIND` variables.
Reference: https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/dpcpp-cpp-compiler/developer-guide-reference/2025-2/supported-environment-variables.html (check `OMP_PROC_BIND`)

Author: Added openmp controls.

> `KMP_AFFINITY` is an Intel OpenMP setting, so it applies only when oneMKL is on the Intel runtime (`MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL`); under the GNU layer use `GOMP_CPU_AFFINITY` or `numactl` instead. `KMP_AFFINITY=granularity=fine,compact,1,0` is appropriate for single-socket systems or when running one process per socket. On multi-socket systems without `numactl` it may bind threads across sockets; verify the actual binding with `KMP_AFFINITY=verbose`.

Reviewer 3: Is KMP_AFFINITY=verbose supposed to be tacked on to KMP_AFFINITY=granularity=fine,compact,1,0? What does that look like?

Author: verbose can be paired with the KMP_AFFINITY,
KMP_AFFINITY=verbose,granularity=fine,compact,1,0

For workloads that spawn multiple Python processes, reduce oneMKL to one thread per process to avoid over-subscription:

```bash
export MKL_NUM_THREADS=1
export MKL_THREADING_LAYER=SEQUENTIAL
```

> This applies to `multiprocessing.Pool`, `concurrent.futures.ProcessPoolExecutor`, and tools like Dask or Ray. Each worker initializes its own oneMKL instance; without capping, N workers × default thread count threads all compete for the same cores.

Reviewer: Wouldn't Dask and Ray parallelize over machines in a distributed environment? That would make each machine run single-threaded.

Author: Right, in a distributed cluster each worker owns its own node or core allocation, so the single-machine oversubscription framing doesn't apply. I've scoped that paragraph to when workers share one machine's cores (multiprocessing, ProcessPoolExecutor, single-node Dask/Ray) and noted the distributed case separately.

> With `joblib` (used by scikit-learn and similar libraries), the `loky` default backend divides the available MKL threads across workers automatically, so no manual capping is needed. The environment variables above are read at import time; for thread-based parallelism (Python threads or free-threaded builds), set them before importing NumPy, or use `mkl-service` below to change thread counts at runtime.

Reviewer: The other process-based backends (as opposed to thread-based) also do this.

Author: Good catch, it's more specific than I first wrote. Per joblib's docs, the automatic inner-thread capping (cpu_count() // n_jobs) is done by the loky backend, and more generally by any backend that sets supports_inner_max_num_threads, not all process-based backends.

**Runtime control with mkl-service.** When environment variables are too coarse, `mkl-service` adjusts thread counts at runtime, including per domain:

```python
import mkl

print(mkl.get_version_string())               # confirm MKL version at runtime
print(mkl.get_max_threads())                  # current thread count

mkl.set_num_threads(8)                        # cap all MKL operations
mkl.domain_set_num_threads(1, domain="fft")  # cap FFT specifically
mkl.free_buffers()                            # return MKL scratch memory to OS
```

Valid domain values: `"blas"`, `"fft"`, `"vml"`, `"all"`. (`"pardiso"` is oneMKL's sparse direct solver, not used by NumPy directly.)

**NUMA pinning on multi-socket systems.** Keeping all oneMKL threads within one socket avoids inter-socket memory traffic. The benchmarks in [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results) show 3.95x geomean at one socket versus 3.66x across both on a 2-socket machine; that gap is NUMA overhead, not a compute limit.

Single process, one socket:

```bash

> export MKL_NUM_THREADS=<cores_per_socket>

Reviewer: I think it's redundant to set this if numactl is going to impose limits either way. You could also disable hyperthreads through numactl.

Author: Agreed on both, and I've updated the guide.

export MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU   # or INTEL in an all-Intel environment; see OpenMP runtime note
numactl --cpunodebind=0 --membind=0 python your_script.py
```

Two data-parallel processes, one per socket:

```bash
numactl --cpunodebind=0 --membind=0 python worker.py &
numactl --cpunodebind=1 --membind=1 python worker.py &
```

**OpenMP runtime: which threading layer to choose.** oneMKL's threaded paths run on an OpenMP runtime. Loading two OpenMP runtimes in one process, oneMKL's Intel OpenMP (`libiomp5`) alongside the GNU runtime (`libgomp`) that most non-Intel PyPI packages bundle, causes thread over-subscription and erratic performance. `MKL_THREADING_LAYER` selects oneMKL's runtime only; it does not prevent another package from loading its own. Set it to match the environment:

- **Mixed runtimes (default `GNU`).** When other packages in the process pull in `libgomp` (common with pip-installed scientific packages), `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU` puts oneMKL on `libgomp` too, so the process shares a single OpenMP runtime.

> - **Intel OpenMP only (`INTEL`).** When `libiomp5` is the sole OpenMP runtime in the process (for example, an environment built entirely from Intel-channel or Intel pip packages), `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL` is fastest.

Reviewer: This doesn't explain what happens with LLVM libomp.

Author: Added. The threading section now covers LibOMP explicitly

> This dual-runtime concern is specific to Linux. Windows oneMKL ships no GNU threading backend, so `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU` falls back to Intel OpenMP threading or the sequential based on availability; the layer is Intel-threaded either way and the default needs no change there.

Reviewer: What happens on windows if a library uses libgomp to make parallel calls to MKL, and MKL is backed by iomp?

Reviewer 4: In this case the OS will load the binaries in this order (theoretically):
1. Caller app/library
2. `libgomp`
3. `mkl_rt`
4. `mkl_core`, `mkl_intel_{lp64/ilp64}` and `mkl_intel_thread`
5. `libiomp`

When the OS tries to load `libiomp`, there are 3 possible behaviors:
- There will be name/symbol conflicts from the already loaded `libgomp` and cause runtime errors.
- If for some reason `libiomp` gets successfully loaded, then `ld` (Linux dynamic linker) will decide which symbol name to resolve at runtime.
- If symbol name is also resolved correctly by any chance, some internal call to `mkl_intel_thread` can fail due to incompatible ABI.

This scenario essentially results in undefined behavior, so it is important that the user knows and selects the right OpenMP vendor to use in their environment.

Reviewer: @vmalia But what about windows?

Reviewer 4: @david-cortes-intel `libgomp` on Windows is only supported through the GCC toolchain via `mingw`, so the behavior is pretty similar for both OS in this scenario. Do you have any particular concerns on Windows?

Reviewer: @vmalia Yes: it's still not clear to me what's the optimal thing to do there. On windows, most other python packages will be using either MSVC's (the majority) or GNU's (a small minority) OMP runtimes, and some of them may make parallel calls to BLAS/LAPACK from OMP sections. If that scenario is to be expected, should the guide recommend setting `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU` also on windows, or is that not a concern as the paragraph mentions?

Reviewer 4: I believe for any Intel optimization guide, the default recommendation should be to use `intel-openmp` because it gives better performance under most scenarios (and that is the purpose of an Intel-provided performance tuning guide) irrespective of the OS.

The second recommendation should be whatever is native to the package manager and ecosystem. These recommendations should be described in short and point to external references. MSVC now also supports `llvm-openmp`: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/cpp/build/reference/openmp-enable-openmp-2-0-support?view=msvc-170 which can be enabled by the user as needed.

From https://github.com/conda-forge/intel_repack-feedstock/issues/59#issuecomment-1786704455 it looks like the python math frameworks preferred using mkl+intel-openmp on Windows, but due to some compatibility issues with `llvm-openmp` (default provider for conda environments), scipy and mkl packages were modified to use `llvm-openmp` by default. I still believe that mkl's default should be `intel-openmp`, but that is out-of-scope for this PR. Considering this design choice as of now, this guide should recommend `llvm-openmp` on Windows.

Author: Thanks both, this is helpful discussion. Agreed the guide should lead with intel-openmp as the performance recommendation, with the ecosystem-native runtime as the fallback (llvm-openmp on Windows).

> This dual-runtime concern is specific to Linux. Windows oneMKL ships no GNU threading backend, so `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU` falls back to Intel OpenMP threading or the sequential based on availability; the layer is Intel-threaded either way and the default needs no change there.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
This dual-runtime concern is specific to Linux. Windows oneMKL ships no GNU threading backend, so `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU` falls back to Intel OpenMP threading.
```

> In conda, the runtime is selected through the `_openmp_mutex` metapackage. To pin LLVM's LibOMP (the upstreamed continuation of Intel OpenMP) on Linux:

Reviewer: The [documentation](https://conda-forge.org/docs/maintainer/knowledge_base/#openmp) mentions:
> On Windows, switching between different OpenMP implementations is not supported. Every package uses the implementation it was built against.

This is not made clear from the lines here.

Author: Good point, I'll state that rule explicitly and cite it.

```bash
conda install -c conda-forge _openmp_mutex=*=*_llvm
```

> On Windows, `_openmp_mutex` offers Intel and LLVM variants but no GNU one, consistent with there being no GNU threading on the platform.

Reviewer: This is not correct:
<img width="1576" height="709" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/461bd454-7f63-4233-a358-6673c49638bd" />

Author: You're right, that line is incorrect, I removed that claim entirely.
conda search verification seems to be done on linux only when writing this, Thanks for catching it.

---

> ## Verifying oneMKL is active

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Verifying That oneMKL Is Active
```

> ## Verifying oneMKL is active

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Verifying oneMKL Is Active
```

Confirm oneMKL is actually the backend:

```python
from threadpoolctl import threadpool_info
import pprint

> pprint.pprint(threadpool_info())

Reviewer: This should be executed **after** importing numpy.

Author: Correct, Added numpy import before it, so the introspection will actually show it.

```

Look for `"internal_api": "mkl"`:

```
[{'internal_api': 'mkl',
  'num_threads': 288,
  'threading_layer': 'gnu',
  'user_api': 'blas', ...}]
```

> The `threading_layer` value matches `MKL_THREADING_LAYER` (`gnu`, `intel`, or `sequential`); the field that confirms the backend is `internal_api: mkl`.

Reviewer: Can also be TBB.

Author: That was missed, good catch on tbb.

> `np.show_config()` will show `name: blas, version: 3.9.0` even with oneMKL active. That is expected: it reflects the generic interface NumPy compiled against, not the runtime library. `threadpoolctl` is the reliable check.

Reviewer: These hard-coded version numbers are prone to get outdated over time.

Author: Removed, it is not necessary here

Confirm oneMKL is dispatching to hardware:

```bash
MKL_VERBOSE=1 python your_script.py 2>&1 | head -20
```

The output should include lines like:

```
MKL_VERBOSE Intel(R) oneAPI Math Kernel Library 2026.0 ...
MKL_VERBOSE DGEMM(N,N,4096,4096,4096,...) 2.1s CNT=1
```

> If only the banner appears and no `DGEMM`/`DFFT`/`VML` lines follow, oneMKL loaded but is not being called.

Reviewer: It should mention here that which of those show depends on what the code is doing. Maybe could provide a sample script with a matrix multiplication that would trigger dgemm.

Author: Added, clarification and example,

Confirm the explicit extensions are active (they report `False` until you patch them, which is the most common reason an expected FFT/random/math speedup does not show up):

```python
import mkl_fft, mkl_random, mkl_umath
print(mkl_fft.is_patched())    # True after patch_numpy_fft()
print(mkl_random.is_patched()) # True after patch_numpy_random()
print(mkl_umath.is_patched())  # True after patch_numpy_umath()
```

---

> ## Benchmark results

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Benchmark Results
```

Reviewer 3: Have these numbers all been through PDT?

Author: Yes this section numbers are all been reviewed and approved through PCR review process and officially published on Intel Distribution for python page - https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/tools/oneapi/distribution-for-python.html

The benchmarks are drawn from [npbench](https://github.com/spcl/npbench), an open-source suite of NumPy-heavy scientific workloads. The nine selected cover a representative mix: matrix and vector operations, Cholesky factorization, element-wise transcendentals, and reductions. Measured on Intel® Xeon® 6980P (Granite Rapids), 2 sockets, 128 physical cores per socket, hyperthreading on, SLES 15-SP7. Stock NumPy used OpenBLAS; Intel-optimized NumPy used oneMKL with all three extension patches active. Both ran the same conda-forge NumPy 2.4.3 binary. Results reflect the full setup: BLAS backend plus all three extension patches. Enabling only the BLAS backend without the extension patches produces lower speedups on benchmarks that exercise FFT, random, or transcendental math.

> ### Geomean speedup by thread count

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Geomean Speedup By Thread Count
```

| Threads | Geomean speedup |
|---|---|
| **128** | **3.95x** |
| 256 | 3.66x |

T=128 fills one socket. T=256 crosses to the second socket, and the NUMA overhead pulls the average down.

> ### Per-benchmark at T=128 (Intel® Xeon® 6980P)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Per-Benchmark At T=128 (Intel® Xeon® 6980P)
```

| Benchmark | Stock NumPy (ms) | Intel NumPy (ms) | Speedup |
|---|---|---|---|
| go_fast | 511 | 30 | **17.0x** |
| gesummv | 543 | 35 | **15.5x** |
| arc_distance | 445 | 67 | 6.6x |
| doitgen | 2,067 | 387 | 5.3x |
| cholesky2 | 1,556 | 430 | 3.6x |
| gemver | 515 | 262 | 2.0x |
| covariance | 1,104 | 689 | 1.6x |
| correlation | 1,141 | 735 | 1.6x |
| softmax | 774 | 553 | 1.4x |

At T=256, threads span both sockets and cross-socket memory traffic reduces speedups across the board. Keeping all threads within one socket (T=128 here) avoids that overhead, which is why the per-benchmark table uses T=128.

**Package versions used in these benchmarks:**

| Package | Version |
|---|---|
| `numpy` | 2.4.3 |
| `mkl` | 2026.0.0 |
| `mkl_fft` | 2.2.0 |
| `mkl_random` | 1.4.0 |
| `mkl_umath` | 0.4.0 |

Intel conda channel: `https://software.repos.intel.com/python/conda`

---

> ## Key considerations

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
## Key Considerations
```

**The extension packages do not activate themselves.** `mkl_fft`, `mkl_random`, and `mkl_umath` do not replace NumPy functions on import. Use the patch function or context manager. Since the 2026.0 release installs the standard conda-forge NumPy rather than a bundled Intel build, there is no longer anything that activates them at build time, so explicit activation is required even in the full Intel® Distribution for Python.

> **The activation model is release-specific; this guide targets 2026.0 and later.** The explicit `patch_*` workflow described here matches the package generation in [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results) (NumPy 2.4.3, mkl_fft 2.2.0, mkl_random 1.4.0, mkl_umath 0.4.0). Earlier releases behave differently, verified on `intelpython3_full=2025.3.0`:

Reviewer: This makes it sounds as if this were expected to change in the future. Maybe it could mention that it applies to versions starting with 2026.0.

Author: That's good to clarify,

- That release installs Intel's own NumPy build (2.3.2 from the Intel channel, not conda-forge) bundled with mkl_fft 2.1.2, mkl_random 1.3.1, and mkl_umath 0.3.1.
- FFT and vectorized math are activated **automatically at import**: `np.fft.fft` already dispatches to `mkl_fft`, and `mkl_umath.is_patched()` is `True` with no call. This automatic activation at import is exactly what the move to conda-forge NumPy in 2026.0 removed, making explicit activation necessary.
- The older extensions do **not** expose the `patch_numpy_fft`/`patch_numpy_umath`/`patch_numpy_random` functions used below. If you are on 2025.3.0 or earlier, do not add these calls; FFT and math are already active, and `mkl_random` never replaced `np.random`. Upgrade to the 2026.0 generation to use the explicit-activation workflow in this guide.

**`mkl_random` is not a drop-in for `numpy.random`.** The same seed produces a different sequence. Do not swap it into code that depends on reproducible random values.

> **AMX does not apply to standard NumPy operations.** NumPy's `float32` and `float64` operations use oneMKL's AVX-512 code paths. AMX tiles only activate for bfloat16 GEMM, which NumPy does not call natively.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
**AMX does not apply to standard NumPy operations, even when using oneMKL.** NumPy's `float32` and `float64` operations use oneMKL's AVX-512 code paths. AMX tiles only activate for int8/bfloat16 GEMM, which NumPy does not call natively.
```
Is that correction accurate? My understanding is that AMX accelerates int8/bf16 GEMMs and even with oneMKL, NumPy operations will not use AMX.

Author: Correct on both, verified. AMX's TMUL unit accelerates INT8 and BF16 GEMM, and NumPy's float32/float64 operations don't use those paths even with oneMKL.

### Installation

There are two practical ways to get a oneMKL-backed NumPy. conda is recommended because it also lets you control the OpenMP runtime (see [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa)). [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge) distribution is recommended.

**conda.** A single command installs NumPy, SciPy, the three extension packages (mkl_fft, mkl_random, mkl_umath), and the runtime libraries. The BLAS/LAPACK backend routes to oneMKL automatically; the extensions are installed but still need explicit activation (the activation process is shown in the [Optimization Levers](#optimization-levers) section).

```bash

> conda create -n idp_env -y python intelpython3_full \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conda create -n idp_env python intelpython3_full \
```

  -c https://software.repos.intel.com/python/conda \
  -c conda-forge --override-channels && \
  conda activate idp_env
```

> **Threading layer for this environment.** `intelpython3_full` is a metapackage that also brings in `scikit-learn`, which is built against GNU OpenMP. In this mixed environment set `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU` so oneMKL and those packages share one OpenMP runtime (see [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa)). If you only need oneMKL-backed NumPy, prefer the targeted install below, which stays on Intel OpenMP (`MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL`) with no such tradeoff.

> Pin python version to match your project if you need a specific interpreter. NumPy comes from conda-forge; the Intel channel supplies Intel's latest oneMKL builds. The `mkl_fft`/`mkl_random`/`mkl_umath` extensions are available from both conda-forge and the Intel channel, so either channel works for them; the command below keeps both channels enabled. To add oneMKL to an *existing* environment that already has conda-forge NumPy installed, swap its BLAS to the MKL variant and add the extensions in place (this re-links the NumPy you already have, it does not reinstall NumPy). Intel-channel packages are built to be compatible with conda-forge but not with the Anaconda defaults channel:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Pin python version to match your project if you need a specific interpreter. NumPy comes from conda-forge; the Intel channel supplies Intel's latest oneMKL builds. The `mkl_fft`/`mkl_random`/`mkl_umath` extensions are available from both conda-forge and the Intel channel, so either channel works for them; the command below keeps both channels enabled. To add oneMKL to an *existing* environment that already has conda-forge NumPy installed, swap its BLAS to the MKL variant and add the extensions in place (this re-links the NumPy you already have, it does not reinstall NumPy).

_Note: Intel-channel packages are built to be compatible with conda-forge but not with the Anaconda defaults channel._
```

```bash

> conda install -y \

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conda install \
```

```python
mkl_fft.patch_numpy_fft()
result = np.fft.rfft2(a)
mkl_fft.restore_numpy_fft()
```

For SciPy users there is a separate backend:

```python
import scipy.fft
import mkl_fft.interfaces.scipy_fft as mkl_scipy_fft

with scipy.fft.set_backend(mkl_scipy_fft):
    result = scipy.fft.fft2(a)
```

Covered transforms: `fft`, `ifft`, `fft2`, `ifft2`, `fftn`, `ifftn`, `rfft`, `irfft`, `rfft2`, `irfft2`, `rfftn`, `irfftn`, `hfft`, `ihfft`, `fftshift`, `ifftshift`, `fftfreq`, `rfftfreq`.

### Random Number Generation: mkl_random

`mkl_random` is a Python interface to oneMKL's Vector Statistics Library (VSL). It samples from the same distributions as `numpy.random` but is not a fixed-seed drop-in: the same seed produces a different sequence. It also uses lower-precision random values (32-bit) than NumPy (which uses 64-bit), so for work that needs high-precision randomness, stick with NumPy's `Generator`. Use it when generating large volumes of random data is a bottleneck and you do not depend on reproducing specific values.

> It can be used two ways. The **context manager** is the zero-code-change path, like the other extensions: existing `np.random.*` call sites keep working and route through VSL (shown below). The **explicit `RandomState` API** is a small code change that lets you pick the generator and the sampling method for the fastest path. The benchmark below uses it with `method='BoxMuller'`, oneMKL's fast normal sampler.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It can be used two ways. The **context manager** is the zero-code-change path, like the other extensions: existing `np.random.*` call sites keep working and route through VSL (shown below). The **explicit `RandomState` API** is a small code change that lets you pick the generator and the sampling method for the fastest path. The benchmark below uses it with `method='BoxMuller'`, oneMKL's fast normal sampler.

_Note: the Box-Muller method, while faster, has different accuracy and granularity than the [ziggurat](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ziggurat_algorithm) method used by default by upstream NumPy, which might manifest when drawing very large quantities of random numbers. Be aware that it won't output absolute values larger than 6.6._
```

Author: Thanks for adding a clear note on these methods.

`joblib`'s `loky` backend (its default, used by scikit-learn and similar libraries) handles this for you: it caps each worker's inner thread pool at `cpu_count() // n_jobs` automatically, so no manual capping is needed ([joblib docs](https://joblib.readthedocs.io/en/stable/parallel.html#avoiding-over-subscription-of-cpu-resources)). This inner-thread limiting is supported by backends that opt in via `supports_inner_max_num_threads` (loky does); other backends may not, so cap manually when using them. For thread-based parallelism (Python threads or free-threaded builds), where the import-time environment variables no longer help, use `mkl-service` below to change thread counts at runtime.

**Runtime control with mkl-service.** When environment variables are too coarse, `mkl-service` adjusts thread counts at runtime, including per domain:

```python
import mkl

print(mkl.get_version_string())               # confirm MKL version at runtime
print(mkl.get_max_threads())                  # current thread count

mkl.set_num_threads(8)                        # cap all MKL operations

> mkl.domain_set_num_threads(1, domain="fft")  # cap FFT specifically

Reviewer: ```suggestion
mkl.domain_set_num_threads(1, domain="fft")   # cap FFT specifically
```

### Installation

There are two practical ways to get a oneMKL-backed NumPy. conda is recommended because it also lets you control the OpenMP runtime (see [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa)). [Miniforge](https://github.com/conda-forge/miniforge) distribution is recommended.

**conda.** A single command installs NumPy, SciPy, the three extension packages (mkl_fft, mkl_random, mkl_umath), and the runtime libraries. The BLAS/LAPACK backend routes to oneMKL automatically; the extensions are installed but still need explicit activation (the activation process is shown in the [Optimization Levers](#optimization-levers) section).

```bash
conda create -n idp_env -y python intelpython3_full \
  -c https://software.repos.intel.com/python/conda \
  -c conda-forge --override-channels && \
  conda activate idp_env
```

> Pin python version to match your project if you need a specific interpreter. NumPy comes from conda-forge; the Intel channel supplies the `mkl_fft`/`mkl_random`/`mkl_umath` extensions and Intel's latest oneMKL builds. To add oneMKL to an *existing* environment that already has conda-forge NumPy installed, swap its BLAS to the MKL variant and add the extensions in place (this re-links the NumPy you already have, it does not reinstall NumPy). Intel-channel packages are built to be compatible with conda-forge but not with the Anaconda defaults channel:

Reviewer: Why does it need to pull them from the intel repository? They are also available in conda-forge:
https://anaconda.org/channels/conda-forge/packages/mkl_random/overview

Author: They are available from the conda-forge too,
Updated this part.

The three explicit extensions share an activation model, and the key point is how little code it takes. Activation is a single one-time call: a **context manager** around a block, best when you want oneMKL for one section and stock NumPy elsewhere, or a **patch/restore pair**, best when oneMKL should stay active for the life of the process. That one call is the only addition. It redirects NumPy's internals so your existing `np.fft.*`, `np.random.*`, and `np.sin`/`np.exp`/`np.log` call sites dispatch to oneMKL with their source unchanged.

In multithreaded code, apply the patch before any threads start computing, or wrap all threads in the context manager. Patching while other threads are mid-computation is unsafe.

Concretely, given an existing function, the only edit is the import-and-activate block at the top. The function body is untouched:

```python
import numpy as np

# The only addition: import each extension and activate it once
import mkl_fft, mkl_umath
mkl_fft.patch_numpy_fft()
mkl_umath.patch_numpy_umath()

def analyze(signal):
    spectrum = np.fft.fft(signal)    # -> numpy.fft, then mkl_fft after activation

>     power = np.abs(spectrum) ** 2    # -> oneMKL Vector Math Library (VML) after activation (large arrays)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    power = np.abs(spectrum) ** 2    # -> oneMKL Vector Math (VM) after activation (large arrays)
```

Reviewer 5: There's not Vector Math Library - it's Vector Math domain in oneMKL. While you still can see vml in oneMKL code - it's a legacy name left for compatibility

Author: updated

>     return np.log(power + 1.0)       # -> oneMKL Vector Math Library (VML) after activation (large arrays)

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    return np.log(power + 1.0)       # -> oneMKL Vector Math (VM) after activation (large arrays)
```

Author: Updated

```python
import mkl_random

n_workers = 4
streams = [
    mkl_random.RandomState(seed=42, brng=("MT2203", i))
    for i in range(n_workers)
]

samples_per_worker = [s.standard_normal(1_000_000) for s in streams]
```

Alternatively, to partition a single generator instead of using the `MT2203` family, `skipahead(n)` advances a stream by `n` steps so each worker starts at a non-overlapping offset. The per-worker `block` must be at least the number of values each worker will draw, otherwise the blocks overlap; size it to your workload:

```python
block = 10_000_000
streams = [mkl_random.RandomState(seed=42) for _ in range(n_workers)]
for worker_id, stream in enumerate(streams):
    stream.skipahead(worker_id * block)  # each worker skips to its own block
```

`skipahead` takes a 64-bit offset, so keep `worker_id * block` within `int64` range (`worker_id * block <= np.iinfo(np.int64).max`); very large strides multiplied by the worker index will overflow.

### Vectorized Math: mkl_umath

> `mkl_umath` swaps oneMKL's Vector Math Library (VML) loops in as the C-level inner loops of NumPy's ufuncs, so existing call sites get VML acceleration with no source change. It covers a broad set of element-wise functions, including the trigonometric and hyperbolic families, `exp`/`exp2`/`expm1`, `log`/`log2`/`log10`/`log1p`, `cbrt`, `sqrt`, and the basic arithmetic ufuncs. It is the lever for transcendental-heavy element-wise math.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
`mkl_umath` swaps oneMKL's Vector Math (VM) loops in as the C-level inner loops of NumPy's ufuncs, so existing call sites get VM acceleration with no source change. It covers a broad set of element-wise functions, including the trigonometric and hyperbolic families, `exp`/`exp2`/`expm1`, `log`/`log2`/`log10`/`log1p`, `cbrt`, `sqrt`, and the basic arithmetic ufuncs. It is the lever for transcendental-heavy element-wise math.
```

> VML takes over only above a per-operation minimum array size: roughly 8,192 elements for transcendentals (`sin`, `cos`, `exp`, `log`), 8,000 for `divide`, and 100,000 for `add`/`subtract`/`multiply` in `mkl_umath` 0.4.x. Below those sizes NumPy's native loops continue to run. These cutoffs are `mkl_umath` implementation details and can change between versions; the takeaway for tuning is that the extension helps most on large arrays.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
VM takes over only above a per-operation minimum array size: roughly 8,192 elements for transcendentals (`sin`, `cos`, `exp`, `log`), 8,000 for `divide`, and 100,000 for `add`/`subtract`/`multiply` in `mkl_umath` 0.4.x. Below those sizes NumPy's native loops continue to run. These cutoffs are `mkl_umath` implementation details and can change between versions; the takeaway for tuning is that the extension helps most on large arrays.
```

Author: Updated, Thanks for pointing it out

Use `--index-url`, not `--extra-index-url`: Intel's index is a partial mirror, and with `--extra-index-url` pip would see PyPI's higher-numbered OpenBLAS wheel and install that instead. Packages Intel does not mirror (for example `threadpoolctl`, used for [verification](#verifying-onemkl-is-active)) install normally from PyPI in a separate step. The Intel wheels target Linux and Windows; if `pip` reports no matching distribution, check that your platform and Python version are covered on the index.

> Whichever path you take, choose the OpenMP threading layer and set it **before anything imports NumPy, SciPy or MKL**. The variable is read once at MKL load time, so exporting it after the import has no effect. Intel OpenMP gives the best oneMKL performance on Intel hardware and is the recommended starting point; the environment-specific cases are covered under [Threads and NUMA](#threads-and-numa):

Reviewer: This part is not very descriptive. It could be more explicit about all-Intel vs. mixture of packages.

Author: Made it explicit and pointed to different threading layer options.

```bash

> export MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL   # Intel OpenMP (libiomp5): best oneMKL performance

Reviewer: I _think_ this is the default and setting it like this doesn't change anything. CC @vmalia .

Reviewer 4: Yes, Intel value is the default. It is good to mention it here in the documentation so the users know about this variable.

Reviewer 3: Resolving since it looks like the requested change by @david-cortes-intel has been implemented

Concretely, given an existing function, the only edit is the import-and-activate block at the top. The function body is untouched:

```python
import numpy as np

# The only addition: import each extension and activate it once
import mkl_fft, mkl_umath
mkl_fft.patch_numpy_fft()
mkl_umath.patch_numpy_umath()

def analyze(signal):
    spectrum = np.fft.fft(signal)    # -> numpy.fft, then mkl_fft after activation
    power = np.abs(spectrum) ** 2    # -> oneMKL Vector Math Library (VML) after activation (large arrays)
    return np.log(power + 1.0)       # -> oneMKL Vector Math Library (VML) after activation (large arrays)

result = analyze(np.random.randn(1_000_000))  # same call, now backed by oneMKL
```

After the two `patch_*` calls, `np.fft.fft` and the ufuncs inside `analyze` dispatch to oneMKL; the function itself never changed. (`mkl_random` has the same `patch_numpy_random()` call, with the reproducibility caveat noted in its section below.) The per-lever benchmarks that follow wrap a block to make the before/after timing explicit in one script, but in real code the import plus one activation call is the whole change.

### Linear Algebra: BLAS and LAPACK

> This is the lever you get for free. Once oneMKL is the backend, `np.dot`, `np.matmul`, `np.linalg.*`, and everything built on them (covariances, distances, decompositions) run on oneMKL's BLAS and LAPACK with no code change and nothing to activate. These kernels dispatch at runtime to an optimized code path for the CPU's instruction set (e.g., AVX-512 on current Xeons). This is the largest single contributor to the geomean speedup in [Benchmark results](#benchmark-results).

Reviewer: Has redundant comma after 'e.g.'.

Author: fixed

> **Reproducibility note:** `mkl_random` and `numpy.random` produce different sequences from the same seed. If your tests or simulations depend on specific random values, do not swap them.

> `brng='MT19937'` selects the Mersenne Twister generator, matching `numpy.random`'s default algorithm. For normal sampling, [`'BoxMuller'`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Box%E2%80%93Muller_transform) is the faster method and the reason it is used here; the alternative [`'ICDF'`](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inverse_transform_sampling) (inverse-CDF sampling) is slower but maps each uniform to a normal one-to-one, which some workloads prefer for tail fidelity. For raw generation speed, keep `'BoxMuller'`.

Reviewer: NumPy's and SciPy's default is Ziggurat. I don't think that can be described as ICDF, and it involves a variable amount of random bit draws per output normal number.

Author: You're right, I've fixed the wording.

samples_per_worker = [s.standard_normal(1_000_000) for s in streams]
```

Alternatively, to partition a single generator instead of using the `MT2203` family, `skipahead(n)` advances a stream by `n` steps so each worker starts at a non-overlapping offset:

```python

> block = 1_000_000

Reviewer: I think something like 2^63-1 (INT64_MAX) would be a more reasonable number. Can also be obtained programmatically from numpy `np.iinfo(np.int64)`.

Author: Good point on not hard-coding a magic stride. One caveat: skipahead takes a 64-bit offset, so `2^63-1 (np.iinfo(np.int64).max)` works as a single stride but overflows once multiplied by the worker index (for worker_id >= 2), `worker_id * INT64_MAX`

`KMP_AFFINITY` is an Intel OpenMP setting, so it applies only when oneMKL is on the Intel runtime (`MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL`). For a runtime-agnostic alternative that also works under LLVM and GNU, use the standard OpenMP controls `OMP_PROC_BIND=close` and `OMP_PLACES=cores`; `OMP_PLACES=cores` is what keeps threads off hyperthread siblings, which core-count alone does not guarantee. In `KMP_AFFINITY=granularity=fine,compact,1,0`, `granularity=fine` pins each thread to a single logical CPU, `compact` places threads on adjacent cores, and the trailing `1,0` are the permute and offset ([Intel reference](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/dpcpp-cpp-compiler/developer-guide-reference/2025-0/thread-affinity-interface.html)). This is appropriate for single-socket systems or when running one process per socket; on multi-socket systems without `numactl` it may bind threads across sockets. To see the actual binding at startup, prepend `verbose`: `KMP_AFFINITY=verbose,granularity=fine,compact,1,0`.

> `MKL_DYNAMIC` [defaults to `TRUE`](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/onemkl/developer-guide-linux/2026-0/mkl-dynamic.html), and while it is on, oneMKL scales the thread count down to the number of physical cores when a higher count is requested, which keeps work off hyperthread siblings automatically. Setting `MKL_DYNAMIC=FALSE` fixes the thread count and honors your binding as-is, so pair it with `OMP_PLACES=cores` (or `numactl`) to ensure threads land on distinct physical cores rather than hyperthreads.

Reviewer: Important to mention that it needs to be paired with `MKL_NUM_THREADS`, otherwise it will still end up using all threads.

Author: Good catch, verified and fixed.

```

`numactl --cpunodebind=0` already restricts the process to one socket's cores, so `MKL_NUM_THREADS` is optional here (set it only if you want fewer threads than the bound cores). `numactl` can also exclude hyperthread siblings from the CPU set with `--physcpubind`.

Two data-parallel processes, one per socket:

```bash
numactl --cpunodebind=0 --membind=0 python worker.py &
numactl --cpunodebind=1 --membind=1 python worker.py &
```

**OpenMP runtime: which threading layer to choose.** oneMKL's threaded paths run on an OpenMP runtime, and `MKL_THREADING_LAYER` selects which one oneMKL uses. The recommendation for best performance on Intel hardware is Intel OpenMP:

```bash
export MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL
```

The one situation that hurts performance is loading two OpenMP runtimes in the same process, for example oneMKL on Intel OpenMP (`libiomp5`) alongside a package that bundles GNU's `libgomp`. Two runtimes over-subscribe the cores. `MKL_THREADING_LAYER` controls oneMKL's runtime only; it does not stop another package from loading its own. When your environment already standardizes on one OpenMP runtime, match oneMKL to it:

> - With LLVM's LibOMP present, use `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL`: oneMKL runs its Intel threading layer on LibOMP and the `KMP_*` controls apply.

Reviewer: Shouldn't it also set `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU` when coupled with LLVM-OMP libraries? CC @vmalia

Reviewer 4: oneMKL using `libomp` is not the expected behavior when setting `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL`. Even if it works now, it cannot be guaranteed to work in the future because LLVM OpenMP is not officially supported by oneMKL as of yet.

The expected behavior when setting `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=INTEL` and not finding `libiomp` is a runtime error.

The expected behavior when setting `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU` and not finding `libgomp` is a runtime error.

Reviewer: @vmalia In the case of a conda OMP mutex set to LLVM, on linux, the file is still named `libgomp.so.1`, same as GNU's. So in that case, it would find GOMP, but it would be LLVM's behind the scenes.

Reviewer 3: @david-cortes-intel is this ask resolved?

Reviewer: I don't understand why this advise should work, given that it will be loading a file named 'libgomp.so.1' with should require the GNU threading layer, but it appears to work correctly in conda environments.

Author: The layer isn't chosen by the filename. `MKL_THREADING_LAYER` tells `libmkl_rt` which of oneMKL's own threading layer libraries to load: `libmkl_intel_thread` for INTEL, `libmkl_gnu_thread` for GNU. Each is built against one OpenMP vendor's function names (Intel's __kmpc_* vs GNU's GOMP_*) and resolves them at load time - https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/onemkl/developer-guide-linux/2023-0/call-onemkl-functions-from-multi-threaded-apps.html

In a conda LLVM-mutex env, `libgomp.so.1` and `libiomp5.so` are both symlinks to `libomp.so`, and that file exports both ABIs `(263 GOMP_*, 722 __kmpc_*/kmp_*)`. So whichever threading layer gets loaded finds its symbols in the same library, which is why either setting works and neither errors.

- If other packages in the process pull in `libgomp` (some pip-installed scientific packages do), `MKL_THREADING_LAYER=GNU` selects oneMKL's GNU threading layer so the process shares a single runtime.

> Platform defaults differ. Linux pip stacks often bundle `libgomp`; conda environments select the runtime through the `_openmp_mutex` metapackage (default LLVM LibOMP on recent conda-forge). On Windows conda, NumPy/SciPy/MKL resolve `llvm-openmp`, and oneMKL there reports the `intel` threading layer. To pin LLVM's LibOMP on Linux:

Reviewer: Default on linux is GOMP, unless MKL from conda-forge is installed, which switches it to LLVM-OMP. Not sure if the packages from the intel channel also set the OMP mutex though.

Author: All correct, but Intel-channel packages do not seem to set the mutex.
